---
layout: null
Title: Anisotropy invariance and quantum-correlated distributions
hide: false
hide_child: false
keywords:
  - learning_note
  - Quantum distribution
categories:
  - learning_note
create_time: 1730794048
---

PS: I pay more attention to 2-bit things

Link to the article: https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.010401

## Summary

We report the discovery of two new three-qubit state invariants, which are similar to 3tangle and are invariants under the local unitary transform and the square permutation. These quantities can be directly explained as pairs of spin-related anisotropies. Applications include the universal sequencing of paired quantum-correlation measures of pure three-qu states; the trade-offs of anisotropy, 3-tangle, and Bell nonlocality; strong monogamous relationships with Bell's inequality, Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen's turn inequality, geometric dissonance of remote state preparation, and fidelity (including the results of any tripartite state); and a form of sharing of quantum secrets that is independent of statistics and reference frames.

## Introduction

A quantum system with only two qubits is sufficient to explore a large number of quantum phenomena [1], but it cannot be said to be fully understood.

As a result, studying systems with three or more qubits is expected to yield greater rewards. In fact, phenomena such as quantum teleportation [2], true multi-party entanglement [3], quantum monogamy [4], decoherence [5,6], Wigner's friend [7], and the Greenberger-Horne Zeilinger (GHZ) paradox [8,9] can only occur in tripartite and higher-order systems.

In this paper, we note that the spin-correlation of arbitrary two-qu states is naturally decomposed into isotropic and anisotropic components, and the corresponding isotropic and anisotropic metrics are introduced, which are invariant under the local unitary and anti-unitary transforms.

Surprisingly, for pure three-qubits, it was found that the anisotropy properties of each pair were identical, that is, they had the same value when any two qubits were evaluated. This pairwise invariance provides a hitherto missing key link that connects the fundamental properties of bipartite and tripartite quantum-correlation.

We give some applications of anisotropic invariance, the first of which is a simple and universal answer to the entangled ordering problem: which of the three simplified pairs of pure three-qupotential states is more entangled, more EPR steerable, or stronger Bell indivisible? This answer further confirms the recently speculated complementarity between bipartite Bell nonlocality and 3-tangle [10], as well as the trade-off between Bell nonlocality and anisotropy.

##  Isotropy is associated with anisotropic spin

$$\begin{aligned}\rho_{AB}=\frac{1}{4}\bigg(\mathbb{1}_{A}\otimes\mathbb{1}_{B}+\mathbf{a}\cdot\boldsymbol{\sigma}\otimes\mathbb{1}_{B}+\mathbb{1}_{A}\otimes\mathbf{b}\cdot\boldsymbol{\sigma}+\sum_{j,k=1}^3T_{jk} \sigma_j\otimes\sigma_k\bigg)\end{aligned}$$

Any 2-bit system can be written like this.

a, b are the Bloch vectors of Alice and Bob's reduced normality, and T is the spin correlation matrix, $T_{jk}=\langle\sigma_{j}\otimes\sigma_{k}\rangle$

The spin matrix T plays a crucial role in encoding the global information of the two-qubit system and is closely related to the strength of its quantum correlation.

Calculation of the T-matrix:

$$( T_{ij} = \text{Tr}(\rho\sigma_i \otimes \sigma_j) )$$

Define a symmetry matrix S$$S=TT^{\dagger}$$

Its characteristic values are s1, s2, s3

It is invariant under arbitrary rotation and reflection of the local coordinate systems of both sides, as well as under the exchange of qubits. For example, these eigenvalues determine the maximum possible violation of CHSH inequalities [27] and various EPR steering inequalities [28-30], as well as the maximum fidelity of remote state preparation [21]).

We use s1≥s2≥s3≥0 to represent the eigenvalues of S. They are all equal if and only if the spin correlation is isotropic with respect to a suitable local coordinate, as in the case of two-qubit Werner states. The natural measure of the degree of isotropy is the average:

$$s_{\mathrm{iso}}:=\frac{1}{3}\sum_js_j,$$

##