---
layout: null
title: Elementary Quantum Mechanics Study Notes
hide: false
hide_child: false
keywords:
  - learning_note
  - Study notes
  - quantum mechanics
categories:
  - learning_note
create_time: 1732792188
---

The big assignment of undergraduate quantum mechanics is a summary by the way.

# Part 1 Summary of knowledge points

## General Overview

The first section of the wave function mainly introduces the concept of quantum mechanics, introduces the Schrödinger equation, introduces probability into the physical interpretation of quantum mechanics, and constructs a bridge between macroscopic and quantum microscopic at the macroscopic level to find the expected value of an observable quantity. The second section introduces the stationary Schrödinger equation, gives several basic and extended representative potential fields, and gives the energy and probability distributions. The third section is an extended summary of the above, introducing the theory of generalized statistical interpretation and the commonly used mathematical and physical representations to pave the way for the future. Chapter 4 expands quantum mechanics into three-dimensional space, using the only very wonderful hydrogen atom that can be solved accurately as an example, and introduces the two fundamental properties of quantum mechanics, angular momentum and spin, which are not present in one dimension. Chapter 5 introduces bosons and fermions, revealing that these two particles have different properties, while also expanding the number of particles, showing the problem that it is difficult to solve the Schrödinger equation accurately and requires approximation methods.

From Chapter 6 onwards, the approximation method is mainly shown.

The first is the theory of timeless perturbation in Chapter 6, which introduces the very important concept of perturbation in quantum mechanics, and reveals the Zeeman effect and fine structure by introducing perturbation. Chapter 7 introduces the variational principle and gives an approximate estimation method for finding the upper limit of the energy in the ground state. Chapter 8 is the WKB approximation, which gives the technique for approximating the solution of the one-dimensional stationary Schrödinger equation. Chapter 9 introduces time-dependent perturbations, which allow the potential field to change with time, and studies the physical phenomena related to transitions through perturbations. Chapter 10 is the adiabatic approximation, which is also an approximation of the changing potential field, which introduces the Berry phase and shows the application of the geometric phase: the AB effect.

In general, starting from the simplest stationary model in one dimension and gradually increasing to three dimensions, the equation gradually has no analytical solution, and needs to be dealt with by approximation methods, first perturbation, then WKB approximation, etc., and other approximation methods are needed for multi-particle problems. After that, two simpler models, time-dependent perturbation and adiabatic approximation, were introduced to get rid of the stationary state, which could analyze some simple problems.

## **Chapter 1 Wave Function**

**This section mainly focuses on some basic physical concepts and physical meanings, Schrödinger equations, physical understanding of wave functions, and the physical significance of expectations and variances in mathematics, which is the basic preparation for quantum mechanics. From this section onwards, the difference between quantum mechanics and the classics is introduced. **

### **0 Introduction**

(1) Blackbody radiation: The Wien formula agrees well in the short-wave part and the long-wave part is poor, while the Ruiley-Jones formula is the opposite, on the basis of the two of them, Planck uses mathematical methods to merge the two formulas, and introduces the very important concept of energy quantization in order to explain the physical mechanism behind it.

(2) photoelectric effect; The second milestone discovery. Introducing the concept of light quanta, when a photon interacts with an electron inside a metal, a part of the energy must first be transferred to the electron so that it can overcome the action of metal ions and escape to the surface. The magnitude of the kinetic energy of the escaped electrons also depends on the frequency of the light, the higher the frequency, the greater the kinetic energy of the escape.

(3) The discovery of microscopic particles

Dalton proposed the atomic theory, Thomson discovered the electron, and Rutherford discovered the proton and proposed a model of the nucleus-like structure of the atom.

(4) Bohr's semi-classical model.

Electrons move in a circular motion around the nucleus in some specific possible orbits, and the farther away from the nucleus, the higher the energy; The possible orbits are determined by the angular momentum of the electron which must be an integer multiple of H; The atom does not emit nor absorb energy when the electrons move in these possible orbitals, the atoms emit or absorb energy only when the electrons jump from one orbital to another, and the radiation emitted or absorbed is single frequency, and the relationship between the frequency and energy of the radiation is given by E=hν.

(5) De Broglie matter waves

Any moving object is accompanied by a wave, and it is impossible to separate the motion of the object from the propagation of the wave, which is called a phase wave. The existence of phase waves is the inevitable result of the energy and momentum of an object satisfying both quantum conditions and relativistic relations. Considering a particle with a mass at rest and a velocity v relative to a stationary observer, it is assumed that the particle is the center of activity of a periodic intrinsic phenomenon and its frequency ν=ω/h, where h is Planck's constant, and ω is the intrinsic energy of the particle. Based on the principle of special relativity and strict quantum relations, the wavelength of a phase wave is λ = h/p, h is Planck's constant, and p is the relativistic momentum### **1 Schrödinger Equation**

$$i\hslash\frac{\partial\psi}{\partial t} = - \frac{\hslash^{2}}{2m}\nabla^{2}\psi + V\psi$$

The Schrödinger equation is not derived from classical theory, and its correctness is verified by experiments. There are two direct bases for this: one is de Broglie's theory of matter waves, and the other is the wave experiment of microscopic particles. The Schrödinger equation is the basic equation of quantum mechanics, and the Schrödinger equation is mainly used to solve the Schrödinger equation in the study of quantum mechanics.

### **2 Wave Function**

The Schrödinger equation describes the wave nature of microscopic particles. Different schools of thought have different understandings of the physical meaning of the wave function ψ, and the current mainstream Copenhagen school emphasizes the role of measurement, which leads to the collapse of the wave function.

Physical significance of the wave function: The square of the absolute value of the wave function represents the probability of the particle appearing in a unit volume at space r, i.e., the probability density. Therefore, the total probability of the occurrence of a particle in the entire space of its motion is required to be 1, i.e., the normalization condition of the wave function. Of course, the Schrödinger equation automatically normalizes the wave function.

### **3 Expected Value**

The physical meaning of expectation is the average of the average measurements of different systems in a ensemble containing the same system, rather than the average of repeated measurements of the same system.

$${< x > = \int_{- \infty}^{\infty}{x\left| \psi\left( x,t \right) \right|^{2}}\text{dx}
}{< p > = m\frac{d < x >}{\text{dt}} = \int_{- \infty}^{\infty}{\psi^{*}\left( - i\hslash\frac{\partial}{\partial x}\psi\text{dx} \right)}}$$

It can be represented by the operator _p ̂_= − _i_h∇

For any given ψ, other mechanical quantities can be expressed as a function of coordinates and momentum, and the operators can be expressed as _Q ̂_(_x_,_p_)

Its specific expected value can be expressed as $\langle \hat Q\rangle=-\int_\infty^\infty \psi^* Q \psi$

In the quantum system, the expected behavior of mechanical quantities follows the classical law (Ehrenfest's Theorem), and taking the expected value of mechanical quantities is the way to derive quantum behavior from classical behavior, and the specific derivation is shown in Exercise 1.

### **4 Uncertainty Principle**

Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle:

$$\sigma_{x}\sigma_{p} \geq \frac{\hslash}{2}$$

The more precise the particle's position, the less precise its momentum is. This is discussed in the following chapters.

## **Chapter 2 Stationary Schrödinger Equation**

**This section first gives a general description of the stationary state problem, and then selects several stationary Schrödinger equations with simple potentials for specific solutions, each of which is more representative, and the one-dimensional infinite depth potential well is the simplest quantum mechanical model, but it has a wide range of applications. The harmonic oscillator is a very useful model for quantum mechanics, and many quantum mechanical systems can use this model for approximation, such as the vibration of atoms in solids, lattice vibrations, etc. The free particles are unfettered and represent the other extreme, which behaves as a scattering state. The δ function potential has both scattered and bound states, showing the singular quantum effect of quantum tunneling. The finite depth square potential well represents a more general situation and can also be used for subsequent promotion. **

### **1 Stationary**

What it means: V does not change over time.

In this case, the Schrödinger equation can be solved using the method of dispersing variables. By separating the variable t, the stationary Schrödinger equation can be obtained:

$$- \frac{\hslash^{2}}{2m}\nabla^{2}\psi + V\psi = E\psi$$

Total Energy Hamiltonian Operator:$$\widehat{H} = - \frac{\hslash^{2}}{2m}\nabla^{2} + V$$

Therefore, the stationary Schrödinger equation can be rewritten as: _Ĥ ψ_= _E ψ, _ and &lt;H&gt;=E

The general solution of the stationary Schrödinger equation is a linear combination of the solutions of the separated variables:

$$\Psi\left( x,t \right) = \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty}{c_{n}\psi_{n}\left( x \right)e^{- iE_{n}t/\hslash}}$$

An important conclusion: for each normalized solution of the stationary Schrödinger equation, E must be greater than the minimum value of V(x).

(Proof: E&lt;Vmin, non-normalizable)

### **2 1D Infinite Depth Square Potential Well**

Cause:

$$V\left( x \right) = \left\{ \begin{matrix}
0\left( 0 \leq x \leq a \right) \\
\infty\left( \text{else} \right) \\
\end{matrix} \right.$$

then the equation can be rewritten as

$$k = \frac{\sqrt{2mE}}{\hslash}$$

$$\frac{\mathrm{d}^{\mathrm{2}}\psi}{\mathrm{d}x^{2}} = - k^{2}\psi$$

The general solution is _ψ_(_x_) = _A_sin _kx_ + _B_cos _kx_

Substitution of the continuity condition _ψ_(0) = _ψ_(_a_) = 0, in order for the solution to be meaningful, required

$$k_{n} = \frac{n\pi}{a},n=1,2,3$$

The possible values of E are:

$$E_{n} = \frac{n^{2}\pi^{2}\hslash^{2}}{2ma^{2}}$$

$$\psi_{n}\left( x \right) = \sqrt{\frac{2}{a}}\sin\left( \frac{n\pi}{a}x \right)$$

This potential field reflects some interesting properties of $\psi_n$:

(1). As long as the potential is symmetrical, the odd-even alternation of the center of the potential well

(2). With the increase of energy, the number of state nodes increases by 1 in turn

(3). Orthogonal to each other

(4). Completeness

For any given initial wave function $\psi(x,0)$ can be used first$$
c_{n} = \sqrt{\frac{2}{a}}\int_{0}^{a}{\sin\left( \frac{n\pi}{a}x \right)\Psi\left( x,0 \right)\text{dx}}$$

Then bring in:

$$\Psi\left( x,t \right) = \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty}{c_{n}\sqrt{\frac{2}{a}}}\sin\left( \frac{n\pi}{a}x \right)e^{- i\left( n^{2}\pi^{2}\hslash/2ma^{2} \right)}$$

### **3 1D Harmonic Oscillator**

$V\left( x \right) = \frac{1}{2}mw^{2}x^{2}$

The solution methods can be divided into algebraic and analytical. Let's start with algebra: the basic idea is to decompose the Hamiltonian operator.

Introduce the reciprocal relation: [A,B]=AB-BA, easily find the regular reciprocal relation[x,p]=iħ, and introduce the ascending and lower-order operators:

$$
a_{\pm} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\hslash m\omega}}\left( \mp ip + m\omega x \right)$$

The Hamiltonian can be rewritten as:

$$H = \text{ℏω}\left( a_{+}a_{-} + \frac{1}{2} \right)$$

There is a lowest ladder that makes the solution $a_-\psi_0=0$ available

$$\psi_{0}\left( x \right) = \left( \frac{m\omega}{\text{πℏ}} \right)^{\frac{1}{4}}e^{- m\omega x^{2}/2\hslash}$$

Energy:

$$
E_{n} = \left( n + \frac{1}{2} \right)\hslash$$

Analytical method: Introduce parameters

$$\xi = \sqrt{\frac{m\omega}{\hslash}}x$$

Solve the Schrödinger equation

$$\frac{\mathrm{d}^{\mathrm{2}}\psi}{\mathrm{d}\xi^{2}} = \left( \xi^{2} - K \right)\psi$$

$$K = \frac{2E}{\text{ℏω}}$$

In the analytic method, the condition for the quantization of energy comes from the technical details of the power series solution of the Schrödinger equation, which requires K=2n+1, so the energy must also be written

$$
E_{n} = \left( n + \frac{1}{2} \right)\hslash$$

Finally, the normalized harmonic oscillator steady:

$$\psi_{n}\left( x \right) = \left( \frac{m\omega}{\text{πℏ}} \right)^{\frac{1}{4}}\frac{1}{\sqrt{2^{n}n!}} H\left( \xi \right)e^{- \xi^{2}/2}$$**For quantum harmonic oscillators, the most special thing is that in quantum solutions, quanta may appear in the classical exclusion zone. With the increase of n, the behavior of quantum harmonic oscillators gradually tends to be classical. **

### **4 Free Particles**

The stationary state of a free particle is a propagating wave

$$\psi_{k}\left( x,t \right) = Ae^{i\left( kx - \frac{\hslash k^{2}}{2m}t \right)}$$

$$k = \pm \frac{\sqrt{2mE}}{\hslash}$$

k&gt;0 represents propagation to the right, and k&lt;0 represents propagation to the left. One point of particular note is that the wave function of free particles cannot be normalized. A wave packet is a superposition of a sinusoidal function, the amplitude of which is modulated by _φ_(_k_), the particle velocity corresponds to the phase velocity, and the envelope velocity corresponds to the group velocity, proving that the group velocity of the free particle wave function is twice the phase velocity.

### **5 Bound state Scattering state δ function potential and quantum tunneling**

Bound state: The particle motion is confined within the potential well, and the energy has a discrete value. Scattering state: Has continuously varying momentum and energy values. The bound state (E&lt;0) of the potential of the δ **** function has only one bound state, regardless of strength:

$$
\psi\left( x \right) = \frac{\sqrt{m\alpha}}{\hslash}e^{- m\alpha\left| x \right|/\hslash^{2}}$$

At this point:

$$E = - \frac{m\alpha^{2}}{2\hslash^{2}}$$

For the scattering state (E&gt;0), at x&lt;0, there is _ψ_(_x_) = _Ae^_ikx + _Be^_ − _ikx_, at x&gt;0 there is _*ψ*_(_*x*_) = _*Fe*_ikx + _*Ge*_ − _*ikx*_, and the continuous requirement: F+G=A+B, plus the boundary conditions, can finally be obtained

$$\beta = \frac{m\alpha}{\hslash^{2}k}$$

$$
G=0,$$

B = \ **frac**{i\beta}{1 - i\beta}A

$$$$

F = \ **frac**{1}{1 - i\beta}A

$$
Define the transmittance coefficient $$

T = \ **frac**{\left| F \right|^{2}}{\left| A \right|^{2}}

$$
Reflection coefficient $$

R = \ **frac**{\left| B \right|^{2}}{\left| A \right|^{2}}

$$
Interestingly, when E<Vmax, the quantum also has a certain probability of crossing the barrier, a phenomenon called quantum tunneling. $$### **6 Finite depth square potential well**

For the more general situation, different regions are also discussed, and then the continuity of the boundary and the continuity of the boundary derivative are used to solve, and finally a transcendent equation is solved.