---
layout: null
Title: Advanced Quantum Mechanics Study Notes
hide: false
hide_child: false
keywords:
  - learning_note
  - Study notes
  - quantum mechanics
  - Advanced quantum mechanics
categories:
  - learning_note
create_time: 1730973644
---

# Advanced Quantum Mechanics Study Notes

Referring to the lecture notes on advanced quantum mechanics and other materials of Mr. WZG, only part of the content is organized.

## Fundamental Theory of Quantum Mechanics

### Foundation

Schrödinger equation for the time evolution of the wave function:

$$\mathrm{i}\hbar\frac{\partial\psi}{\partial\mathrm{t}}=\widehat{H}\psi$$

1. The Schrödinger equation fully describes the time evolution of the state function.

2. The state function satisfying the Schrödinger equation satisfies the superposition principle.

### Representation Theory

Just as we use Cartesian coordinate system or curvilinear coordinate system to study different problems in classical physics, in quantum mechanics, the appropriate choice of "coordinate system" will greatly simplify the problem solving process. To this end, Dirac proposed the concept of the state wave function as a vector of the Hilbert space of multi-dimensional linear vectors, that is, the theory of numerical wave functions on the basis of expressing the space composed of the independent variables of the wave function of the system—the representation theory. The normalized eigenfunction system corresponding to the different eigenvalues of any Hermitian operator can form a suitable set of Hilbert space basis vectors, so as to give the corresponding specific representations of states and mechanical quantities in quantum mechanics.

In order to quantitatively characterize states and mechanical quantities, we usually construct a Hilbert space with the eigenfunction system of a certain mechanical quantity as the basis vector. The method of constructing a Hilbert space from the eigenfunction system of mechanical quantities is called representation.